Did you and your colleagues think the NM Library was improving?
Did you think we were making progress, getting better?
It was getting better.
We were building collections.
Our budget was improving.
The people, we were still taking great pride in what we were doing.
And I don't mean just the library.
I mean, everybody had
pride in what we were representing the university uh and let's see now uh you moved away from northgate uh i'll bet somewhere along in there didn't you not really really when i came back from lsu i got a apartment on cross street across the church from the lutheran church okay
And I lived there until I got married in 72 and moved into Bryan then.
What did library professionals do in the 60s and 70s for fun, for enjoyment, after work hours?
Personally, back during those times, I was going to school.
And I know they had, it seemed like maybe we had more social things together as a group.
Describe those.
What were those?
You might have a picnic, library-wide picnic.
And when you had a library-wide picnic, everybody came.
Families, spouses, it was just family.
And I think today's time has changed the togetherness.
Did most of the people live, most of the professionals live in the Bryan College Station area?
Most of them did.
During the time when I first came, a lot of the professors, because I know I wrote and asked when I came back from LSU, there was campus housing.
Most of the campus housing was for graduate students, and you had to be a married graduate student.
But there were some houses for professors.
Mm-hmm.
And some of the professors actually lived on campus.
But it was, I don't know, what's the word in it?
Not cohesive, but everybody was just, everybody was family.
Where now everybody goes in their different directions.
And I know back in those days we did not have a staff association, but if someone in the library got sick or died or someone in their family was in the hospital or died, there would be an announcement made and everybody contributed to a fund, whether it was to buy flowers or cards or food or whatever.
for them, and I know if something happened, and I know they still do things like this, but I know one of our librarians' sons was burned very badly, and Hung Chi Yu, and his sons were burned very badly, and so there was an outpouring from the library community as well as other people on campus for aid for one of their own, taking care of our own.
And during that era, did
you librarians have other library, university libraries with whom y'all were kind of looking at as fellow travelers, others you made comparisons with?
I think we always did the ARL
statistics and tried to find libraries with like size or like collections land-grant colleges we tried to make sure that we were on the and we were always on the leading cutting edge we're not doing that as much now we were one of the first group to really get the automation and the computers and technology and we had been we were noted for being
the leading edge in that.
Describe how that came about.
I know we started with VRS after dark with some of the search engines, which was, we had
mediated searches where people came in and paid to have a literature search done for them.
And we still have people coming back to school for post-doctorate work or that have been here before, maybe some of the old ags that are retired and that come back.
I remember when I was a graduate student, you could hire somebody to do the literature search and we would do it.
And the professors had an account
with their budget and a librarian had to do the searching of the literature for them.
Where nowadays it's a do it yourself.
And we have a lot more.
But this was something new and innovative.
And we took poster sessions where it was just like a, we had a bulletin board type deal and we would publish what we were doing
at national conferences and give talks on what we were doing.
And people would come and study and see how we were doing it, how successful it was.
And a lot of them were based, the schools were based on what we were doing.
And we served as a, prototype is not the word, but there would be a company that was trying to develop some software, develop a search engine or something.
And A&M was the one that they would
asked to test out what they were doing and ask us for our recommendations to make it better, what to cancel, what not to do, and what to do, how to make it easier for the people to use it.
Why did they call on A&M, do you think?
I think because we had an interest in doing that.
We were going to grow.
And we didn't have the funding that University of Texas did.
And in those days, there was probably a greater rivalry with the University of Texas and A&M than there is now.
And they had a bigger library budget.
They had more of the Puff Fund.
And so we were the second child, so to speak, in funding.
Because our budget,
was mostly the state mandated, whatever the legislature did, that was our budget.
Where University of Texas had other funds that they were able to build their collections with that we did not have.
And we were trying to compete with them, to pass them.
What was it like to shift everything in the library to computers and high tech?
We had and we still have some that I don't like all that newfangled stuff but now more and more people are liking the computers because the professors can do it at their office.
The students can do it at home.
They can do it at their dorm and not have necessarily have to come in and they can
Like the little kid learning to walk or learning to do this.
I can do it myself.
I do it myself.
And they like that.
But there are some that still want, we still have a few retired professors that come in.
There's one named Lee comes in all the time and he says, I just don't understand all this newfangled stuff and I need this.
Find it for me.
And he gets real upset if you can't find it for him.
But usually we can.
And we'll try to show them how.
And then there's, of course, the ones that you can show and they don't want to do it.
And they'll say, well, show me again.
They've got their whole list of things to find it.
But now, as everything was shifted to high tech, it meant literally that every item in the library had to be handled.
Right.
Sometimes recatalogued.
Some of it was recatalogued.
Everything had a, not a barcode and such, but some kind of what we call OCR label, which is kind of like a social security number put into every book and entered in.
One thing with our size that
I wish we could have a special funding for is an inventory of what we have.
Because Louis Bauer, an English department, used to come in every summer.
He didn't work a full summer in the English department, but in the summers, I mean year for the English department, but in the summers he would do an inventory of the library materials.
So we had a better idea of what was coming up missing.
And when we did put these OCR labels in, we did a pretty much inventory then because every book had to be handled to have them stuck into.
Nowadays, as they're going to different
means of checking out as the book comes in if it doesn't have the new code attached to it it's being put on there as it goes out so that's kind of a
In all of your experience, have we ever had any major losses, either theft or fire or flood?
We've had several major losses.
I know there was one time period, I know it was the early 70s, late 60s, that time period, where
in these old stacks, old cushion stacks and eight floors.
The windows had no bars or screens and they were opened in the summer for ventilation.
And there was a guys in some pickup trucks backed up and they were just throwing the books out into the trucks.
I don't know where they were taking them, whether they were taking them to sell or just what they were doing, but a lot of them were recovered.
There was a time period when
We had a good patent collection, and now the patents are kept under lock and key because we have all the patents.
We're a U.S.
depository, but whole sections of the patents
And it was happening all over the United States.
This group would go in and say they were going for patent number, X to whatever number, they got them from A&M and from another place they got another set.
So they were building their own collection.
Some of them were, I think, I hate to say the Russians, they were building a collection and others, but these patents were being stolen and sold and a lot of them were recovered.
We have, or we had a lot of books, older books in the stacks that had a lot of plates in them that people would go in and cut the plates out and sell those.
For example, we didn't have any of the Audubon plates, but a lot of the older, rare books, somebody would know what they were looking for and go in and cut the plates out.
You have no idea what era this was?
In the 70s, 60s and 70s.
Has a thief ever been, a notable thief ever been caught in the NM Library?
They caught some of the ones that were doing with the patents, but I don't know.
Right, they caught them.
And they weren't students, I presume?
No.
These were pros.
All these that were going out were pros.
And one of the ones that...
was stealing a lot of our rare books and plates and all that.
He was also doing that at University of Texas and other major libraries around the United States.
And I'm not sure where it was that he finally got caught, but when they searched his belongings, they found things with our A&M College stamp on them.
Now, in your years, we never had a fire or a flood or a building collapse to cause damage, did we?
A lot of times when it would rain, the basement area would flood.
And also we had the emergency plastic rolls to cover books in the Evans Library.
And I think when they renovated this time and built on the annex, a lot of this leakage was taken care of.
But we were always having, you know, at night having a water main break or something.
And I know...
About eight years ago, there was a lot of pipes broke in the basement of the cushion building for the wildlife and fisheries collection.
It flooded that collection.
And it was bad on us because not only did they lose so many of the specimens for the wildlife collection, but all the formaldehyde smell was seeping into this, especially into the Cushing Building.
And if you had a study carol in the Cushing Building, you really couldn't use it until they got rid of all the formaldehyde smell.
But we never lost anything like that was a priceless, one-of-a-kind.
Not that I know of.
I can't think of anything we ever lost like that.
All right, let's see.
Dyke was the library director, and then who comes after him?
Jim Smith, I believe.
Describe him.
Well, he was a local boy that made good, I guess you would say.
And he was here, and he also built into the humanities and social sciences.
And he went on to SUNY New York.
And he, like I said, the library was growing.
And he was getting, in this era, they were encouraging the librarians to go to meetings.
I personally fell in a catch-22.
When I first came here, the only people that go to the professional members were the administrative staff.
The others did not get to go.
So I didn't get to go to those.
And then there was a time period where they were letting the newest members
staff members go.
Well, by that time, I was not considered new, so I didn't get funding to go then.
You were either administrator or one of the newest ones.
And then later on, Jim Smith, Jack Smith, not Jim Smith, Jack Smith kept encouraging and he wanted us to get involved in state
national programs and during the 70s and 80s it being involved with the state organization was very important now it's not so much not so many people in the library are involved with the Texas Library Association I'm one of the ones that have been in it since the year one in fact I have a real low
Texas Library Association membership number, I think I'm number 624.
And there's something like over 7,000 members now.
So I'm on a committee and I found out that the Reference Roundtable started in 1964 in Texas Library Association and I've been a member of the Reference Deposit Section since 1964 when it first started.
But now people are getting more involved in national.
And even now, the trend is not so much even going to the meetings.
Some are involved in international, but the professional meeting seems to be losing its draw.
Not draw, but it's not counting as much for the ones in the library.
Now that we've gone, we have professional status, and being members of organizations was very important, and now it seems like everybody does their own thing.
It's not.
It's not as important now.
Our travel budget in the library has never been like the travel budget for other departments on campus, because I have friends that are just in the classified staff area and other departments, and they're encouraged to go to meetings, and their entire way is paid.
All their hotel, their meals, there's everything else, and in the library, for example, this year,
each librarian was given $730.
An airfare loan to Chicago or San Francisco or Washington DC can wipe out that and if you're a member of these organizations, you're expected to go to your
annual meeting, your semi-annual meeting, as well as other meetings and other meetings too.
And the state only allows you $70 per DEM and no hotel room nowadays can you find at $70.
So the librarians double, triple, even five in a room just to go.
and you find the cheapest right, and you take the red-eye special to the meetings because that's all the budget that we're allowed, but yet our people still go.
And that's been a bone of contention all along, and it hasn't, the budget has not grown that much for us to go, but yet they're expecting us to go.
Evelyn King, one of our assistant directors, did start a
not a scholarship fund, but a fund to add to professional development for the librarians to help aid in some of this.
So, but it's still not the total amount of, like I said, this past year, the last two years.
After Jack Smith, does Irene Hoagley come then?
No, Henry Allsmeyer.
Oh, Henry Allsmeyer.
Make believe I didn't know Henry Alsmeyer.
Describe him.
Mr. Alsmeyer was one of the good old boys.
He was tall, thin, like, and he knew everybody on campus.
Everybody knew him.
He knew the people that had been at A&M before, and he had, he'd see somebody that he knew, and a lot of the
camaraderie with former ags.
Mr. Osmar knew him, and they knew him, and so they would come in and they may give something to the library where they might not have given to, quote, a stranger.
But he was one that was just, you could describe as a good old boy.
Was, for you staff members, did you all see him as a good leader?
I personally liked him.
Some of them didn't.
They thought he was too easy going.
But that was his style.
And I think we got a lot done under him.
And he was always pleasant, wasn't he?
Always.
I never saw him cross.
And like I said, he was one of the ones that
Really came up from the ranks.
He went to graduate school here at A&M and got his doctorate here at A&M.
And he took leave from the library to finish his degree program.
He was working here as a library.
We had several people that worked at the library that went on and got advanced degrees here.
Now he left to go to Central Arkansas?
Somewhere in Arkansas.
Now he's retired there.
All right.
Then he followed by Irene Hoedland?
Irene Hoedland, yes.
Describe her.
She was micromanager.
And a lot of them, she clashed with a lot of them, but she had her strength and she knew how she wanted the library to be and did not involve the staff so much in making decisions.
All the decisions were made by her from the carpet.
and in the building to a lot of materials that a lot of times, Ms.
Charles Meyer would get a little bit more committees to work on and grow, but Dr. Hodley made the decisions.
And if she didn't agree with it, I don't care how many committees she, and she appointed the committees.
They weren't elected.
And you could give her, they were as an advisory.
And if she didn't like the advice,
She did.
Now, she came from Ohio State.
She came.
How easy was it for her to understand A&M when she got here?
I'm sure it was hard because she wasn't used to the male dominance.
And A&M was male-dominated.
And many years, if...
If you were military, and a lot of retired military came to work at A&M, and I think they got some of their positions because they were retired military.
And so it was a military influence.
And we had several, I don't know, one for example, he retired from, I forgot where Mr. Puget retired from, but he retired and he came to work at A&M and he worked here until he retired.
And he was on the very strict regimented,
supervisory program, and this did not work with Dr. Hoadley.
And the military feeling, maybe it was, maybe because this was an all-male institution, whatever the man said ruled, and this did not work with Dr. Hoadley.
She would have been the first major female
Influence.
Well, administrator on campus.
Do you remember any situation she encountered that were a little unique because of her being a woman?
I'm sure she had a lot of battles to win to get to be heard in meetings with administrators because she was a woman and they just didn't
respect a woman in that type of leadership position, which now I think they're, and it's still on campus, it's hard for women to be in the administration, is that more?
I was the chairman of the search committee at that time and Dr. Calhoun was very positive in his hoping we would select a female.
He, I remember him particularly saying it's about time we get a woman in a key position.
Did Dr. Hoadley have some key subordinates during her years in the library?
Who did she turn to most as her second, third level in library?
I think Evelyn King was the assistant director with her.
And Evelyn graduated from LSU the year after I did, and she came in as Special Collections and built Special Collections.
She was before Don Dial.
And she had a lot of influence there, and she met a lot of the former ags and had a good working relationship with professors and former ags as her...
tenure as head of Special Collections.
And this complemented Dr. Henry Osmeier because they worked very closely together and he introduced her to a lot of people like that.
And her working with this, I think, eased some of Dr. Hoadley's deal because she had already been
accepted like I said back when I was back in the school like she was considered a part of the institution it was okay for her to be here she had been here she was not trying to show that she was more of anything she was what's what's the terminal and she was not not being dominated but she was not domineering
and I think her personality smoothed over a lot of things that Dr. Hoagley's, but Dr. Hoagley was more, that was her personality, that was her background, and that's why she had to fight her way up in her circles is what she was doing.
Now this last major addition to the Evans Library was done during Dr. Hoagley's years, I think, wasn't it?
She did, she had a lot to do with it.
Let's see, when did Dr. Heath come in?
He came.
But like the green carpet, she picked it.
Yeah, Dr. Holt, like I said, the carpeting.
And one thing about the carpeting and the full floor, Eddie Evans had been in.
You had brown and tan and green and green and blue and blue.
And it was color-coordinated by the floor.
And the color might have been awful, but we were still using it.
It was not showing the wear that some of the carpeting is.
And so we were in that building and used it for 10 or 12 years.
And when you think of all the thousands of people that walked on that for no more wear and tear in the building, that was one of the things that, but like I said, she picked it.
And we may not agree with the color, but it sure lasted.
And then she had input into the annex deal, and that was kind of her, and then Dr. Heath did into that.
But I think that was her major deal, was to get this, and then she could retire with it.
With dignity, she had her monument.
And Dr. Heath came eight, nine years ago.
Right.
Do you remember the first reaction to him?
What did people think when he was selected?
Some of them, he was one of the ones that they interviewed about, I don't know, going to about three interviews.
And he had a favorable interview with the staff.
And I know someone, I don't remember who, but it was someone from the administration that was coming over to that, and you said, well, how do you feel about fundraising?
And Dr. Heath came in, to my impression, not so much the normal day-to-day running of the library.
He's more of the ones that go out and get funds.
And that's what his position has been.
And that's what he's basically done and led the day-to-day with the assistant directors.
And that's good and that's bad.
I mean, he needs a little bit more hand on what's going on in the building.
But I remember at the interview somebody asked him what he thought about fundraising.
He said, I have been doing that at Tech.
That is what I'm used to.
And they said, how do you feel about talking to?
He said, I regularly have coffee with Sid Richardson, Bass.
And he started naming the top money people in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.
He said, those are my friends I have coffee with all the time.
I socialize with them.
I play golf with them.
Now, was this in the interview?
This was in the interview.
Before he came here.
This was before he came here.
So he was letting us know that he would not be intimidated by meeting someone that had money.
And he would not hesitate because he said, I have friends in those places and I have no hesitation for asking them.
And I will go and my major goal is to bring funds to this library to build it.
In terms of the day-to-day style he represents, did he change things?
Were things more formal, less formal, more relaxed, less relaxed when he got here?
We see less of him than we did of any other director.
And I know the other directors had more of a, you'd see them more.
So he's more of a delegator of authority.
Right.
As far as y'all are aware, in recent years, has the budget been... The budget has grown, and he's working on that.
And we've got, in the last few years, I don't know, 10 years, we've had somebody in the foundation that's been...
charged with getting money for the former students and all for the library to build money.
And then Dr. Heath goes out on fundraising deal and he's encouraged Don Dahl and Special Collections and David Chapman to go out and build those special collections so that we'll have, we're not just a general library.
And for years,
The A&M Library was representing the public library as well as the library, because we served as the library for the whole community.
And now a lot of the stuff is going research and bringing in money for that, especially in special collections.
Those are the noted special collections like the science fiction collection, the range livestock collection, or something like this.
What are the other, what are the major special collections that A&M has?
I think the Range Livestock Collection, the Western Americana, Western Illustrators, the Science Fiction Collection,
We, that was a frivolous type collection, because science fiction is pulp magazine that you don't, mostly comes out in paperback.
And we personally, I think we need to order more than one copy, one for the special research collections, and we're a noted collection in that area, as well as a circulating copy for the students.
We have a good bit of Texana, we'll never be the
outstanding collection in Texas Santa.
We have a good collection in say the Ku Klux Klan era materials.
Did we get the Jeff Dykes collection after you got here?
Yes, we did.
Tell this machine anything you remember about how that came about.
All I know is he was
here with the Western Americana, and I don't know how he talked us into getting it, but we have it, and he was also one of the ones that started in the Westerners